This is a fun book to read because then you just mentioned in there what the original source is to read to you know
It's like it's like the herald bloom of economics, right? You just like it's a book written for smart people
Okay, so let's just jump into it. Okay, the book we're talking about is
Goat who is the greatest economist of all time and why doesn't matter? All right, let's start with Keynes
So in the section in Keynes
You quote him. I think talking about Robert Marshall. He says
Alfred Marshall. Oh, sorry Alfred Marshall. He says
The master economist must possess a rare combination of gifts. He must be a mathematician
historian statesman philosopher no part of man's nature
Man's nature or his institutions must lie entirely outside his regard and you say well Keynes is obviously talking about himself
Because he was all those things and he was arguably the only person who was all those things at the time
He must have known that. Okay. Well, you know what I'm gonna ask now
So what should we make of Tyler Cowan citing Keynes?
Using this quote a quote that's also applies to Tyler Cowan. I don't think it applies to me
What's the exact list again? Am I a statesman?
Did I sure you're late at the Treaty of Versailles or something comparable? I don't know we're in Washington
I'm sure you talk to all the people who matter quite a bit
Well, I guess I'm more of a statesman than most economists
But I don't come close to Keynes in the breadth of his high-level achievement in each of those areas
Hmm. Okay, let's talk about them those achievements. So chapter 12 in general theory of interest employment and money
Here's a quote. It is probable that the actual average result of investments even during periods of progress and prosperity
Have disappointed the hopes which promoted them
If human nature felt no temptation to take a chance
No satisfaction profit-apart in constructing a factory a railway a mine or a farm
There might not be much investment merely as a result of cold calculation
Now it's a fascinating idea that investment is irrational
Or most investment throughout history has been irrational
But when we think today about the fact that active investing exists, you know for winners curse like reasons
VCs probably make on average less returns than the market
There's a whole bunch of different examples you can go through right M&A
Usually doesn't achieve this energy is it expects throughout history has more most investment been selfish to your rational
Well, Adam Smith was the first one. I know to have made this point that
Projectors, I think he called them are overly optimistic
So people who do startups are overly optimistic people who have well-entrenched VC franchises
Make a lot of money and there's some kind of bifurcation in the distribution, right?
Then there's a lot of others who are just playing at it and maybe hoping to break even
so
The rate of return on private investment if you include small businesses
it's highly skewed and
Just a few percent of the people doing this make anything at all. So there's a lot to what Cain said
I don't think he described it adequately in terms of a probability distribution
But then again, he probably didn't have the data, but I wouldn't reject it out of hand. Hmm
Another example here is
This is something your colleague Alex Tobrock talks about a lot is that innovators don't internalize most of the gains you get to society
So here's another example where you know, the entrepreneur compared to one of his first employees
Is he that much better off for taking the extra risk and working that much harder?
What does this tell us about?
Is it it's a marvelous insight that you know, we're actually more of a seeking than it's selfishly
Selfishly good for us. That was Reuven Brenner's claim in some of his books on risk
Again, I think you have to distinguish between different parts of the distribution
So it seems there's a very large number of people who foolishly start small businesses
Maybe they overly value autonomy when they ought to just get a job with a relatively stable company
So they're part of the thesis is correct
And I doubt if there's really big social returns to whatever those people do even if they could make a go of it
But there's another part of the distribution
People who are actually innovating or have realistic prospects of doing so where I do think those social returns are very high
Now that 2 figure
That cited a lot. I don't think it's really based in much real
It's maybe not a crazy seed of the pants estimate
But people think like oh, we know it's two percent and we really don't so you look at Picasso, right? He
Helped generate cubism with Brock and some other artists
How good is our estimate of Picasso's income?
Compared to the spin-offs from Picasso. We just don't really know, right? We don't know it's two percent
It could be one percent. It could be six percent
How different do you think it is in art versus, uh, I don't know entrepreneurship versus different kinds of entrepreneurship
There's different industries there as well, right? I'm not sure it's that different
So say if some people start blogging a lot of people copy them, right?
Well, some people start painting in a particular style a lot of people copy them
I'm not saying the numbers are the same, but they don't sound like
Issues that in principle are so different into two percent overestimate or underestimate. It might be wrong
But in which way is it wrong?
My seed of the pants estimate would be two to five percent. So I think it's pretty close
But again, that's not based on anything firm. Here's another quote from Keynes
Uh, investment based on genuine long-term expectation is so difficult as to be scarcely practicable
He who attempts it must surely lead much more laborious days and run greater risk than he who tries to guess better than the crowd
How the crowd will behave?
Is so one way to look at this is like, oh, he just doesn't understand, uh, efficient market hypothesis
It's like before random walks or something
but, uh,
There's things you can see in the market today where, uh, you know
Are the prospects for future dividends so much higher after cover than they were immediately after the crash
Um, how much a market behavior can be explained by these sorts of uh claims from Keynes?
I think Keynes had the view that for his time
You could be a short run speculator and in fact beat the markets
And he believed that he did so
And at least he did for some periods of his life that may have been luck or maybe he did have special insight
It probably wasn't true in general that we don't really know did efficient markets hold during, you know, Britain at that time
Maybe there just were profit opportunities for smarter than average people
Uh, so that's a view. I'm inclined not to believe it, but again, I don't think it's absurd
Keynes is saying for people who want money, this is biased toward the short term. You can get your profits and get out
And that's damaging long-term investment, which in fact he wanted to socialize
So he's being led to a very bad place by the argument
But again, we shouldn't dismiss it out of hand
Why is it not easy to retrospectively study what uh, how efficient markets were back then in the same way we can study it now in terms of like
Oh, you look at um, uh, the price earnings ratios and then what were the dividends afterwards over the coming decades for those companies
Based on their stock price or something. I don't know. Uh, how many publicly traded firms there were in Britain at that time
I don't know how good the data are things like bid asks spread
At what price you actually executed trades can really matter for testing efficient markets hypothesis
So uh, probably we can't tell even though there must be share price data of some sort at what frequency
Well, is it once a day? Is it once a week?
We don't have the sort of data we have now where you can just test anything you want
He also made a interesting point is like not only is it not profitable, but even if you succeed
Um, society will look at the contrarian in a very negative light
Uh, you will be like doubly punished for being a contrarian
But that doesn't seem to be the case right like if somebody like Warren Buffett or Charlie Munger people who do be the market are actually pretty revered
They're not punished in public opinion
And they pursued mostly long-term strategies, right?
But again trying to make sense of Keynes if you think about long-term investing and I don't think he meant Buffett style investing
I think he meant building factories trying to figure out what people would want to buy 25 years from that point in time
Uh, that probably was much harder than today. So you had
Way less access to data
Your ability to build an international supply chain was much weaker
Uh geopolitical turmoil at various points in time was much higher. So again, it's not a crazy view
I think there's a lot in Keynes that's very much of his time
That he presents out of a kind of overconfidence as being general and it's not general it may not even be true
But there were some reasons why you could believe it. Hmm another quote from Keynes
Uh, I guess I won't read the whole quote in full
But basically he says over time as investments go or markets get more mature more and more
Of equities are held basically by passive investors people who don't have a direct hand in the involvement of the enterprise
Um, and you know the the the share of the market that's passive investment now is much bigger
Should we be worried about this as long as at the margin people can do things? I'm not very worried about it
So there's two different kinds of worries. One is that no one monitors the value of companies
It seems to me those incentives aren't weaker. There's more research than ever before
There's maybe a problem not enough companies are publicly held
But you can always if you know something the rest of the market doesn't buy or sell shore and do better
The other worry is those passive investors have economies of scale and they'll end up colluding with each other
And you'll have say like three to five mutual funds private equity firms owning a big chunk of the market portfolio
And in essence
Directly or indirectly they'll tell those firms not to compete. It's a weird form of collusion
They don't issue explicit instructions like say the same
Few mutual funds own coke and Pepsi
Should coke and Pepsi compete or should they collude? Well, they might just pick lazier managers who in some way give you implicit collusion
Maybe this is another example of the
Innovators being unable to internalize their gains as an active investors who are providing this information to the market
You know, they don't make out that much better than the passive investors, but they're actually providing a valuable service
Uh, but this the benefits are diffused throughout throughout society
I think overconfidence helps us on that front
So there's quote unquote too much trading from a private point of view
But from a social point of view, maybe you can only have too much trading or too little trading and you might rather have too much trading
I explain that why why is there why can't it only be too much or too little?
Well, let's say the relevant choice variable is investor temperament
So yes, you'd prefer it if everyone had the temperament just to do what was socially optimal, but if temperament is some
This inclination in you and you can just be overconfident or not confident enough
And overconfidence gives you too much trading
That might be the best we can do again fine-tuning would be best of all
But i've never seen humans where you could just fine-tune all their emotions to the point where they ought to be
Yeah, okay, so we can ask the question. How far above optimal are we or if we are above optimal?
Uh in the chapter kane says that over time as markets get more mature
They become more speculative and the example he gives us like the new york market seems more speculative to him than the london market at a time
Um, but today finance is eight percent of gdp
Uh, is that what we should expect it to be?
To uh to efficiently allocate capital. Is there some reason we can just look at that number?
And we can actually say that that's too big. I think the relevant number for the financial sector is what percentage it is of wealth not gdp
So
You're managing wealth and the financial sector has been a pretty constant two percent of wealth
For a few decades in the united states with bumps. Obviously 2008 matters, but it's more or less two percent
And that makes it sound a lot less sinister. It's not actually like growing at the expense of something and eating up the economy
so
You you would prefer it's less than two percent, right? But two percent does not sound outrageously high to me
And if the ratio of wealth to gdp grows over time
Which it tends to do when you have durable capital and no major wars
Uh, the financial sector will grow relative to gdp. But again, that's not sinister think of it in terms of wealth
I see so one way to think about it is like the the management cost as a fraction of the
Assets under management or something and that's right. Yeah, that's two percent of that bad. Yeah, okay, interesting
I want to go back to the the risk aversion thing again because I don't know how to think about this
So, you know, his whole thing is these animal spirits. They guide us to make all these bets and
engage in all this activity
in some sense it's he's saying like
Not only are we not risk neutral, but we're more risk seeking than is
than is rational whereas
The the way you'd conventionally think about it is that humans are risk averse, right? They they have
They prefer to take less risk than is rational in some sense
Um, how do we score this?
Well, here Milton Friedman and other goat contender comes into the picture
So his famous piece with savage
Makes the point that risk aversion
Is essentially context dependent. So he was a behavioral economist before we knew of such things
So the same people typically will buy insurance and gamble gambling you can interpret quite broadly
And that's the right way to think about it. So just flat out risk aversion or risk-loving behavior
It doesn't really exist almost everyone is context dependent now why you choose the context you do
Maybe it's some kind of exercise in mood management
So you ensure your house so you can sleep well at night you fire insurance
But then you get a little bored and to stimulate yourself you're you're betting on these nba games
And yes, that's foolish, but it keeps you busy
And it helps you follow analytics and you read about the games online
And maybe that's efficient mood management and that's the way to think about risk behavior
I don't bet by the way
I mean you could say I bet with my career, but I don't bet on things
Well, what is the way and what's your version of the water shake it?
What is the thing where you just for the entertainment value or the distraction value you you take more risk than
Then would seem rational
Well, like writing the book goat
Which is not with any known publisher. It's just online. It's free
It's published within gpt for
Took me quite a while to write the book
I'm not sure there's a huge downside, but it's risky in the sense of it's not what anyone else was doing
So that was a kind of risk. I invested a lot of my writing time in something weird
And I've done things like that pretty frequently
So that keeps me you could say excited or like starting mru, you know the online education videos and economics
No pecuniary return to me at all indirectly. It costs me a lot of money
That's a sort of risk. I feel it's paid off for me in a big way, but
On one hand you could say well tyler, what do you actually have from that and the answer is nothing?
Yeah, well, this actually raises the question
I was going to ask about these go contenders in general and how you're judging them where
You're looking at their work as a whole
Given that I don't know some of these risks pay off that these intellectuals take
Some of them don't pay off should we just be looking at their top contributions and just disregard everything else?
For hayek, I think one of the points you have against him is that his top three articles are amazing
But after that there's a drop off
The top risk you take are the only ones that matter. Why are we looking at the other stuff?
I don't think they're the only ones that matter, but I'll weight them pretty heavily
But your failures do reflect
Usually and how you think or what you know about the world
so hayek's failures
For instance his inability to come up with the normative standard in constitution of liberty
It shows in some ways. He just wasn't rigorous enough
He was content with the kind of germanic put a lot of complex ideas out there and hope they're profound
And you see that even in his best work now that is profound
But it's not as if the failures and the best work for all these people are unrelated and same with canes like canes more or less
Changed his mind every year
That's a strength, but it's also a weakness
And by considering canes is really good works and bad works like his defenses of tariffs
You see that and the best work
He also moved on from in some way if you read how to pay for the war in 1940
If you didn't know better, you would think it's someone criticizing the general theory
How uh
Does quantity have equality all of its own when you think of great intellectuals where many of these people have like volumes and volumes
Of work was that necessary for them to get the greatest sets or is the rest of it?
Just a distraction from the things that really stand a test of time for the best people it's necessary
So john stewart mill wrote an enormous amount most of it's quite interesting
But his ability to see things from multiple perspectives
I think was in part stemming from the fact that he wrote a lot about many different topics like french history ancient greece
He had real depth and breadth
If canes is alive today, what are the odds that he's in a polycule in berkeley writing the best written less wrong posts you've ever seen
I'm not sure what the counterfactual means. So canes is so british
Maybe he's an effective altruist
at cambridge
And you know given how he seems to have run a sex life. I don't think he needed a polycule like a polycule
It's almost a william sony and device to economize on transactions costs
But canes according to his own notes seems to have done things on a very casual basis
He had a spreadsheet, right of essential partner and from context it appears
He met these people very casually and didn't need to be embedded in where the five people who get together regularly
So that's not a hypothetical. We saw we think we saw what he did
and
I think he'd be at cambridge, right? That's where he was. Why should he not today be at cambridge?
How did a person
How did a gay intellectual get that amount of influence in the britain of that time?
When you think of somebody like alan touring, you know helps a britain win world war two and is castrated
because of
You know one illicit encounter that is caught
Well, was it just not public? How did how did he get away with it basically?
I don't think it was a secret about canes. He had
Interacted with enough people that I think it was broadly known. He was politically very powerful
He was astute as someone managing his career. He was one of the most effective people
You could say of all time not just amongst economists
And i've never seen evidence that canes was in any kind of danger
Our touring also may have intersected with national security concerns in a different way
I'm not sure we know the fall alan touring story and why it went as badly as it did
But there was in the past very selectively and I do mean very selectively
More tolerance of deviance than people today sometimes realize
Oh interesting and canes benefited from that but again, I would stress the word selectively
Say more what determines who is selected for this tolerance. I don't feel I understand that very well, but there's plenty
Say in europe and britain of the early 20th century where quote-unquote outrageous things were done
And it's hard to find evidence that people were punished for
Now what accounts for the difference between them and the people who were punished? I would like to see a very good book on that
Hmm. Um, yeah, I guess it's similar to our time, right? We have certain taboos and you can get away with them
Yeah, exactly. They say whatever on twitter and other people get cancelled
Actually, however, you gotta know it. I feel like you've never been in at least as far as I know of I haven't heard you being in the part of
Any single controversy, but uh, you have some opinions out there. I feel people have been very nice to me
Yeah, what would you do? How did you become the canes of our time?
If we're comparing
I think just being good-natured
Yeah helps and helping a lot of people helps
Entering I'm a huge fan of wrote a paper on him with Michelle Dawson
But it's not obvious that he was a very good diplomat and it seems
He very likely was a pretty terrible diplomat and that might be feeding into this difference
how do you think about the long-term value of um, and the long-term impact of intellectuals you disagree with
So do you think over the course of history?
Basically the improvements they make to the discourse and the additional things they give us a chance to think about
That washes out their object level
The things that were object level wrong about or
Well, it's worked that way so far, right? So we've had economic growth obviously with interruptions
But so much has fed into the stream and you have to be pretty happy with today's world compared with say 1880
Uh, the future may or may not bring us the same
But if the future brings us continuing economic growth, then i'm gonna say exactly that. Oh be happy
They fed into the stream. They may have been wrong, but things really worked out
But if the future brings us
It a shrinking population asymptotically approaching a very low level
And greater poverty and more war then you've got to wonder. Well, who is responsible for that, right? Who would be responsible for that?
We don't know but I think secular thinkers will fall in relative status if that's the outcome and that's most
prominent intellectuals today myself included. Yeah
Who who would rise in status as a result? Well, there's a number of people
complaining strenuously about fertility declines
Uh, if there's more war
Probably the hawks will rise in status whether or not they should an alternative scenario is that the pacifists rise in status
But I basically never see the pacifists rising in status for any more than brief moments
Like after the vietnam war, maybe they did after all the run
Yes, but again that didn't last because world war two swept all that away, right?
So the pacifists seem to lose long-term status no matter what
And that means the hawks would gain in status
And those worried about fertility and whatever technology drives the new wars if that is what happens
Let's say it's drones. It's possible, right? Uh people who warned against drones
Which is not currently that big a thing. There are quite a few such people
But there's no one out there known
For worrying about drones the way say illeaser is worried about known for worrying about AI now drones in a way are AI
But it's different. Yeah, other than that freedmen steward I'm sure other people have you know talked about
We're not that far away from doing sickness. I guess you have
I guess there's a thing you do video with millions of views. Whoever made that would rise. I think steward I was wrong
What was I'm sorry, uh, that's true
But anyways, yeah, but those people could end up as much more important than they are now. Yeah. Okay. Let's talk about hayek
Sure. Um, so I before we get into his actual views
I think his career is a tremendous white pill in the sense that he writes the rotisserieftum in 1944
When nazi germany and so the union are both, you know, prominent players and
Honestly, like the way things shaked out, uh
I mean, he would be pretty pleased that like a lot of the biggest collectivisms of the day have been, uh wiped out
So it is a tremendous white pill. You can have a career like that
He was
Uh
Not as right as he thought at the time, but he ended up being too grumpy in his later years
Oh, really?
He thought well collectivism is still going to engulf the world and I think he became a grumpy old man
And then maybe it's one thing to be a grumpy old man in 2024
But to be a grumpy old man in the 80s
Didn't seem justified. What was the cause? What like what specifically did he see that he he thought they were
Atavistic instincts in the human spirit, which were biologically built in that led us to be collectivists
Right and too envious and not appreciative of how impersonal orders worked and that this would cause the west to turn into something quite crummy
I wouldn't say he's been proven wrong
but a lot of the west has had a pretty good run since then
And uh, there's not major evidence that he's correct
The bad events we've seen like some war coming back
Uh
Something weird happening in our politics. I'm not sure how to describe it. I'm not sure they fit the Hayek model
A sort of simply the accretion of more socialism
Um, but in terms of the basic psychological urges towards envy and resentment
Isn't the rise of wokeness provide evidence for his view, but now wokeness
I would say is peaked and is falling. That's a big debate
I don't see wokeness as our biggest problem
I see excessive bureaucracy, sclerotic institutions, kludgeocracy as bigger problems
They're not unrelated to wokeness to be clear
But I think they're more fundamental and harder to fix
Let's talk about uh Hayek's Hayek's uh arguments
So obviously he has a famous argument about decentralization
But when we look at companies like amazon uber these other big tech companies
They actually do a pretty good job of central planning, right? There's like a sea of logistics and drivers and
Uh, um trade-offs that they had to square
Uh, do they provide evidence that central planning can work?
Well, i'm not a cosian so cos in his famous 1937 article said the firm is planning and he contrasted that to the market
Right. I think the firm is the market. The firm is always making contracts in the market is subject to market checks and balances
to me, it's not
You know an island of central planning and the broader shroff of the market. So i'm just not cosian
So people are a cosian. This is an embarrassing question for them
But i'll just say amazon being great is the market working and they're not centrally planning
Even the soviet union it was very bad, but it didn't end up being central planning. It started off that way for a few years
so
I think people misinterpret
Large business firms in many ways on both the left and the right
Wait, but under this argument
It still adds to the credence of the people who argue that basically we need the government to control
because if it is the case that soviet union is still
Uh, not central planning people would say well, but yeah, but that's kind of what I want in terms of there's still kind of checks in terms of
import exports of the market test is still applied to the government in that sense
Uh, well, what's wrong with that argument that basically you can treat the government as that kind of firm
I'm not sure I followed your question. I would say this i view the later soviet union as being highly decentralized
Managers optimizing their own rents and setting prices too low to take in bribes
a la paul craig roberts what he wrote in the 80s
And that's a very bad decentralized system and it was sort of backed up by something highly central communist party in the ussr
But it's not like the early attempts at true central planning in the soviet union in the 20s right after the revolution
Which did totally fail and were abandoned pretty quickly even by lenin
Hmm
Would you kind of 50s period in the soviet union as more centrally planned than or more decentralized by that point decentralized
You have central plans for a number of things
Obviously weaponry steel production you have targets
But even that tends to collapse into decentralized action just with bad incentives
So your explanation for why did the soviet union have high growth in the 50s?
It is it more ketchup? Is it more that they were in communists at the time?
How would you explain a lot of the soviet high growth was rebuilding after the war
Which the central planning can do relatively well right you see government rebuilding city say in germany that works pretty well
But most of all this is even before world war two just urbanization
It shouldn't be underrated today given we've observed china
But so much of chinese growth was driven by urbanization
So much of soviet growth you take someone working on a farm producing almost nothing put them in the city
Even under a bad system. They're going to be a lot more productive
And that drove so much of soviet growth before after the war
But that at some point more or less ends right as it has
Well, it hasn't quite ended with china, but it certainly slowed down and people don't pay enough attention to that
I don't know why it now seems pretty obvious. Hmm. Uh, but but going back to the the point about firms
so
I guess I the point I was trying to make is I don't understand why the argument you make that
Well, these firms are still within the market in the sense that they they have to pass these market tests
Why that couldn't also apply to government directed production?
Because then people sometimes it does right government runs a bunch of enterprises
Uh, they may have monopoly positions, but many are open to the market in singapore government hospitals compete with private hospitals
Government hospitals seem to be fine. I know they get some means of support. Yeah, but they're not all terrible
But I guess it's a general principle you'd be against more government, uh, directed production, right?
Well depends on the context. So if it's say the military, uh, probably we ought to be building a lot more of some particular things
And it will be done through Boeing, Lockheed and so on
But the government's directing it paying for it in some way quote-unquote planning it
And we need to do that. We've at times done that well in the past
so
People overrate the distinction between government and market. I think especially libertarians
But that said there's an awful lot of government bureaucracy. That's terrible
Doesn't have a big market check
But very often governments act through markets and have to contract or hire consultants or hire outside parties
And it's more like a market than you think
um
I want to ask you about another part of Hayek
So he has an argument about how it's really hard to aggregate information towards a central planner
But then more recently there have been our results in computer science that just finding the general equilibrium is computationally intractable
Um, and which raises the question. Well, the market is somehow solving this problem, right?
separate from the problem getting the information make it use making use of information to allocate scarce resources
Um, how how is that computationally a process that's possible?
Uh, you know, I'm sure you're aware like the linear optimization and non-convex constraints. How does the market solve this problem?
Well, the market's not solving for a general equilibrium
It's just solving for something that gets us into the next day
And that's a big part of the triumph just living to fight another day wealth not going down
Not everyone quitting
And if you can do that things will get better and that's what we're pretty good at doing is just building a sustainable structure
And a lot of it isn't sustainable like the fools who start these new small businesses
But they do pretty quickly disappear and that's part of the market as well
So if you view the whole thing in terms of computing a general equilibrium
I think one of high ex-grade insights is that's just the wrong way to think about the whole problem
so lack of
Computational ability to do that doesn't worry me for either the market or planning because to the extent planning does work
It doesn't work by succeeding at that
Like singaporean public hospitals
Don't work because they solve some computational problem
They seem to work because the people running them care about doing a good job and enough of the workers go along with that
Yeah, so related to that. I think in the meaning of competition. He makes the point that
um, the the most interesting part of markets is when they go from one equilibrium to another
Because that's where they're trying to figure out what to produce and how to produce a better and so on and not the
Equilibrium's themselves and it seemed related to the peter teal point in zero to one that
Uh, monopoly is when you have interesting things happen because when there's just competitive equilibrium
There's no profits to
invest in r&d or to do cool new things
Do those seem like related points? Am I reading absolutely a high xs a competition as a discovery process or procedure
Makes that point very explicitly and that's one of his handful of greatest essays one of the greatest essays in all of economics
Is there a contradiction in hayek in the sense that the decentralization he's calling for
Uh results in the results and have a specialist having to use the very scientism and statistical aggregates
Of course that high fender rate scientism scientism is great
It can be abused
But we all rely on scientism if you have an mRNA vaccine in your arm
Well, how do you feel about scientism and so on?
How much would we worry about uh this opening up the whole system to fragilities if there's like no one mind that understands
Large parts of how everything fits together people talk about this in the context of if there's a war in china and the the producers
Didn't think about that possibility when they put valuable manufacturing in taiwan and stuff like that
No one mind understanding things is inevitable under all systems
This gets into some of the alignment debates right if you had one mind that understood everything or could control everything
You have to worry a great deal about the corruptibility of that mind
So legibility transparency are not per se good. You want enough of them in the right places, but you need some kind of balance
so I think uh
Supply chains are no longer an under analyzed problem
But until covet they were and they're a big deal
And the haiki an argument doesn't always work
Because the signal you have is of the current price
And that's not telling you how high are the inframarginal values
If you get say cut off from being able to buy vaccines from india because you're you know at the bottom of the queue
So that was a problem
It was the market falling because the price doesn't tell you inframarginal values and when you move from some
Ability to buy the output to zero those inframarginal values really matter. Hmm
What would hayek make of ai agents and as they get more powerful you have some market between the ai agents
Uh, the there's some sort of decentralized order as a result. What what insights would you have about that?
Well, a lot of hayekians wrote about these issues including at george mason
In the 1980s and I think some of those people even talked to hayek about this
And my recollection which is imperfect is that he found all this very interesting
And in the spirit of his work and don levoi was leading this research paragraph. He died prematurely of cancer
Uh bill tallow was also involved and some of this has been written up
And it is very hayekian and george mason george mason actually was a pioneer in this area
Well, what do you make of the agents the market between them and the sort of infrastructure and order that would uh
That would need to facilitate that they're going to replicate markets on their own
This has been my prediction and I think they're going to evolve their own currencies. Maybe at first they'll use bitcoin
But there'll be an entire property rights will be based at least at first on what we now call nfts
I'm not sure that will end up being the right name for them
But if you want property rights in a so-called imaginary world, that's where you would start with bitcoin and nfts
So I don't know what percent of gdp this will be at first it will be quite small
But it will grow over time and it's going to show hayek to have been right that had these decentralized systems evolved
Do you anticipate that it'll be sort of a completely different sphere and there's like the ai agents economy and there's a human economy
And they obviously have links between them
But it's not intermixed like they're not on the same social media or the same
A task rabbit or whatever. It's like it's a very separate infrastructure that's needed to
For the ai agents to talk to themselves versus talk to humans
I don't see why we would enforce segregation now. You might have some segregated outlets like maybe x twitter
Well, we'll keep off the bots. Let's say it can even manage to do that
But if I want to hire, you know a proofreader
I'm going to deal with the ai sector and pay them in bitcoin
And I'll just say to my like personal ai assistant. Hey go out and hire an ai and pay them with whatever
And then just not think about it anymore and it will happen
Maybe because there's like much higher transaction costs with dealing with humans and interacting with the human world
Whereas they can just send a bunch of vectors to each other. It's much faster for them to just
Just like have a separate dedicated infrastructure for that
And but transactions costs for dealing with humans will fall because you'll deal with their quote-unquote assistance, right?
So you'll only deal with the difficult human when you need to and people who are very effective
Will segregate their tasks in a way that reflects
Their comparative advantage and people who are not effective will be very poor at that and that will lead to some kind of bifurcation of personal productivity
Like how well do you know what to delegate to your ai? I'll predict you'll be very good at it. You may not have figured it out yet
But say you're like a a plus on it and other people are d that's a big comparative advantage for you
Hmm
So you
We're talking I guess about like gpt 5 level models. What do you think in your mind about like, okay?
This is gpt 5. What happens with gpt 6 gpt 7? Do you see it?
Or just do you still think in the frame of having a bunch of ras or does it seem like a different sort of thing at some point?
I'm not sure with those numbers going up
mean
A what a gpt 7 would look like or how much smarter it could get
Think people make too many assumptions there
It could be the real advantages or integrating it into workflows by things that are not better gpt's at all
And once you get to gpt say 5.5
I'm not sure you can just turn up the dial on smarts and have it like integrate general relativity and quantum mechanics
Why not?
I don't think that's how intelligence works and this is a hacky and point and some of these problems
There just may be no answer like maybe the universe isn't that legible and if it's not that legible
the gpt 11
Doesn't really make sense as a you know a creature or whatever
Is isn't there a hacking argument to be made that listen you can have billions of copies of these things
Imagine the sort of decentralized order that could result the amount of decentralized tasks of knowledge that billions of copies talking to each other could have
That in and of itself is an argument to be made about
The whole thing as a as an emergent order will be much more powerful than we were anticipating
Well, I think it will be highly productive. What tacit knowledge means with a eyes. I don't think we understand yet
Is it by definition all
non tacit or does the fact that how gpt 4 works is not legible to us or even its creators so much
Does that mean it's possessing of tacit knowledge or is it not knowledge?
See none of those categories are well thought out in my opinion
So we need to restructure our whole discourse about tacit knowledge in some new different way
But I agree these networks
Are they eyes even before like gpt 11? They're going to be super productive
But they're still going to face bottlenecks, right? And I don't know how good they'll be
It's a overcoming the behavioral bottlenecks of actual human beings the bottlenecks of the law and regulation
And we're going to have more regulation as we have more a eyes, right? Yeah
Well, when you say there'll be uncertainties, I think you made this argument when you were responding to alex fstein on fossil future
Or you said the uncertainties also extend out into the domain where there's a bad outcome or a much bigger outcome than you're anticipating
That's right. So can we apply the same?
Argument to ai like the fact that there is uncertainty is also a reason for worry
Well, it's always reason for worry, but there's uncertainty about a lot of things and ai will help us with those other uncertainties
So annette, do you think more intelligence is likely to be good or bad including against x risk?
And I think it's more likely to be good
So if it were the only risk I'd be more worried about it than if there's a whole multitude of risks
But clearly there's a whole multitude of risks
But since people grew up in pretty stable times
They tend not to see that in emotionally vivid terms and then this one monster comes along and they're all terrified
What would hayek think of prediction markets?
Well, there were prediction markets and hayek's time
I don't know that he wrote about them, but I strongly suspect he would see them as markets that through prices communicate information
But even at the like they're on the time of the civil war
There were so-called bucket shops in the u.s. In new york where you would bet on things
They were betting markets with cash settlement probably never called prediction markets
But they were exactly that later on they were banned, but it's an old-standing thing
There were betting markets on lives in uh 17th century britain different attempts to outlaw them
Which I think basically ended up succeeding, but under the table. I'm sure it still went on to some extent
Yeah
The the reason it's interesting to think about this is because his whole argument about the price system is that
You can have a single dial that aggregates so much information
But it's precisely for this and that before that reason
It's so useful to somebody who's trying to decide, you know, based on that information
But it's precisely for this reason that it's so aggregated that it's hard to learn about any one particular input to that dial
But I would stress it's not a single dial and whether hayek thought it was a single dial
I think you can argue that either way
So people in markets, they also observe quantities. They observe reaction speeds
There's a lot of dimensions to prices other than just oh this newspaper cost four dollars
Other terms on which it's advertised
So markets work so well because people are solving this complex multidimensional problem
And the price really is not a sufficient statistic the way it is in arahan debrew and I think at times hayek understood that
And at other times he writes as if he doesn't understand it, but it's an important point
Hmm
Someone related question. What does it tell us about the difficulty of preserving good institutions? Good people?
That the median age of a corporation is 18 years
And they don't get better over time right decade after decade what corporation?
There's rich corporations that continue improving in that way
Well, I think some firms keep improving for a long time
So there are japanese firms that date back to the 17th century
Right, they must be better today or even in 1970 than they were a way back when
Like the leading four or five danish firms
None of them are
younger than the 1920s
So maersk
You know the firm that came up with ozampic the pharmaceutical firm
They must be much better than they were back then right they have to be
So
How that is possible to me is a puzzle, but I think in plenty of cases it's true
It can really say that the
The best firms in the world aren't ones that have been improving over time
Uh
You know if you look at the biggest companies in our market cap, it's not like this is what it
You what it takes to get there is hundreds of years of continual refinement
Uh, what does that tell us about the world or just as well hundreds of years?
But again, don't be overly biased by the us experience and the tech sector
There's around the world plenty of firms
That at least seem to get better as they get older
Certainly their market cap goes up some of that might just be a population effect
Maybe their productivity per some unit is in some ways going down
Uh, but that's a very common case
And why the us is such an outlier is an interesting question right israel clearly is an outlier
In a sense, they only
Have pretty young firms right and they've done very well in terms of growth
Can you be explained by the fact that in these other countries?
It's actually just harder to start a new company not necessarily the older companies are actually getting better
Uh possibly but it does seem the older companies are often getting better right like in danmark
So, you know, take china is
Pretty much entirely new firms because of communism
Japan in particular seems to have a lot of very old firms
I don't know if they're getting better, but I don't think you can write that off as a possibility
This is hayak in competition as a discovery process and it seems like you predicted nimbyism
So he says in a democratic society
It would be completely impossible using commands that could not be regarded as just to bring about those changes
That are undoubtedly necessary, but the necessity of which could not be strictly demonstrated in a particular case
Uh, so it seems like he's kind of talking about what we today call nimbyism
It's sure and there's plenty of nimbyism in earlier times
You look at the 19th century debates over restructuring paris
Housemen and putting in the broader boulevards and the like
That met with very strong opposition. It's a kind of miracle that it happened. Yeah
Is this is this a thing that's inherent to the democratic system?
I recently interviewed dominant Cummings and obviously planning is a big issue in the uk
It seems like every country has every democratic country has this kind of problem and most autocratic countries have it too
Now china is an exception. They will probably slide into some kind of nimbyism even if they stay autocratic
um
Just people resist change interest groups always matter public opinion a la david hum always matters
and uh
It's easy to not do anything on a given day, right and that just keeps on sliding into the future
So but not in the i guess india has had a lot of nimbyism
It's fallen away greatly under modi and especially what the state governments have done
But it's can be very hard to build things in india still
Although it is a democracy. I guess the china example. We'll see what happens there
That's right. Uh, but it would be very surprising
Because the chinese government is highly responsive to public opinion on most but not all issues
So why wouldn't they become more nimby especially with the shrinking population?
They're they're way overbilled, right? So the pressure to build will be weak
And in cases where they ought to build I would think quite soon. They won't
How how much of economics is a study of the uh, the systems that human beings use to allocate scarce resources
And how much is is just something you'd expect to true be true of aliens ai's
It's interesting when you read the history of economic thought how often they make
Um, they make mention of human nature specifically like canyons is talking about the people have high discount rates, right?
Yeah, but what are your thoughts here my former colleague gordon tallick wrote a very interesting book on the economics of ant societies and animal societies
And very often they obey human like principles or more accurately humans obey non-human animal like principles
So I suspect it's fairly universal and depends less on quote-unquote human nature
Then we sometimes like to suggest maybe that is a bit of a knock on some behavioral economics
The logic of the system arman elshin wrote on this gary becker wrote on this
There was some debates on this in the early 1960s and that the automatic principles of profit and loss
and selection at a firm
Firm-wide level
Really matters and it's responsible for a lot of economics being true. I think that's correct
actually that raises an interesting question of
Uh, within firms they the sort of input they're getting from the outside world the ground truth data is
profit loss bankruptcy. It's like very
Uh, very condensed information and from this they had to make the determination of who to fire who to hire who to promote
What project to pursue?
Uh, you know, how do you make sense of how firms disaggregate this this very condensed information?
I would like to see a very good estimate of how much your productivity gains is just from selection
And how much is from while smart humans figure out better ways of doing things
And there's some related pieces on this in the international trade literature
So when you have free or trade a shockingly high percentage of the productivity gains
Come from your worst firms being bankrupted by the free trade
And alex tabarak has some mr posts on this
I don't recall the exact numbers
But it was higher than almost anyone thought and that to me suggests the alchi and becker mechanisms of evolution at the level of the firm
Enterprise or even sector
They're just a lot more important than human ingenuity and that's a pretty hayekian point
Hayek presumably read those pieces in the 60s. I don't think he ever commented on them
interesting
Let's talk about uh mill
uh
So his arguments about uh the law force against uh woman and how basically throughout history
The the the state of uh woman in in his society is not natural or the wisdom of the ages
But just the result of the fact that men are stronger and have codified that
Can you apply that argument into today's society against children and the way we treat them?
Yes, I think we should treat children much better. We've made quite a few steps in that direction
It's interesting to think of mill's argument as it relates to hayek
So mill is arguing you can see more than just the local information. So keep in mind when mill wrote
Every society that he knew of at least treated women very poorly oppressed women
Women because they were physically weaker or at a big disadvantage
If you think there's some matrilineal exceptions mill didn't know about them. So it appeared universal
And mill's chief argument is to say you're making a big mistake
If you overly aggregate information from this one observation that behind it is a lot of structure
And a lot of the structure is contingent and that if i mill unpack the contingency for you
You will see behind the signals
So mill is much more rationalist than hayek. It's one reason why hayek hated mill
But clearly on the issue of women
Mill was completely correct that women can do much better will do much better
It's not clear what the end of this process will be. It will just continue for a long time
Women achieving in excellent ways
And it's mill's greatest work. I think it's one of the greatest pieces of social social science and it is anti hayekian
It's anti small c conservatism
His other book on liberty is very hayekian though, right in the sense that the free speech is needed because information is
Is it contained in many different people's minds? That's right
And I think mill integrated sort of you could call it hayek
An anti hayek better than hayek ever did. That's why I think mill is the greater thinker of the two
But but on the topic of children
What wouldn't mill say specifically? I guess you could have talked about it if you wanted to but
I don't know if you was in today's world. We sent into school. They're there for eight hours a day
Most of the time is probably wasted
And we just like use a lot of coercion on them that we don't need to how would we think how would he think about this issue?
There's mill's own upbringing, which was quite strict and by current standards oppressive
But apparently extremely effective in making mill smart
So I think mill very much thought that kids should be induced
to learn the classics
But he also stressed they needed free play of the imagination
In a way that he drew from german and also british romanticism and he wanted some kind of synthesis of the two
Uh, but by current standards mill. I think still would be seen as a meanie toward kids
But he was progressive by the standards of his own day
Do you buy the arguments about aristocratic tutoring for people like mill and um, there's many other cases like this
But that you know, since they were kids they were taught in the taught by one-on-one tutors and that's that explains part of their
greatness
I believe in one-on-one tutors, but I don't know how much of those examples is selection, right?
So i'm not sure how important it is
But just as a matter of fact if I were a wealthy person and just had a new kid
I would absolutely invest in one-on-one tutors. Hmm. You're talking the book about how mill is very concerned about the
quality and the character development of the population
Uh, but when we think about the fact that somebody like him was elected to the parliament at the time
the greatest thinker who's alive is elected to uh, to uh,
To government and it's hard to imagine that could be true in with
Today's world does he have a does he have a point with the regards to the quality of the population?
Well mill as with women he thought a lot of improvement was possible
Yeah, and we shouldn't overly generalize from seeing all the dunces around us. Yeah, so to speak
Uh, maybe the the book is still out on that one
But it's an encouraging belief and I think it's more right than wrong
There's been a lot of moral progress since mill's time right and everything but certainly how people treat children
and or their their why how men treat their wives
and uh
Even when you see negative reversals
Stephen pinker so far seems to be right on that one
But you do see places, you know, like Iran how women were treated
Seems to have been much better in the 1970s than it is today. So there are definitely reversals
but on the specific reversal of somebody of mill's quality probably wouldn't get elected to congress in the us or
Parliament of the uk. Is it how how big a deal is that advice may get through the cracks due to all the local statesmen who wisely advise
their representatives in the house, right? So
I don't know how much that process is better or worse compared to say the 1960s
I know plenty of smart people who think it's worse. I'm not convinced that's true. Hmm
Let's talk about smith
Adam smith. Yeah
um
Okay, so the one of the things I find really remarkable about him is he so he publishes in 1776 the wealth of nations
And basically around that time gibbon publishes the decline and fall of the roman empire. Yep
um
So he publishes the decline and fall of the roman empire and one of his lines in there is if if you were asked to
It stayed a period of time and man's condition was what is his best? It was you know during the reign of comotas to demission
Uh, and that's like 2000 years before that, right? So there's basically been at least it's like plausible to somebody really smart
That there's basically been no growth since for 2000 years
Uh and in that context to be making the case or markets and mechanization and division of labor
I think it's like even more impressive when you when you put it in the context that he has like basically been seeing
You know 0.5 percent or less growth
Strongly agree and this is in a way smith being like mill. Yeah smiths is seeing the local information of very small growth
And the world barely being better than the roman empire
And inferring from that with increasing returns division of labor how much is possible
So smith is a bit more of a rationalist than hyac makes him out to be right
Now I I wonder if we use the same sort of
Extrapolative thinking that smith uses of we haven't seen that much growth yet
But if you apply these sorts of principles, uh, this is what you would expect to see
What would he make of the potential ai economy where we see two percent growth?
A year now, but you have you know billions of potential more agents or something
Would he say well actually you might have 10 growth because of this like this is a you would need more economic principles to explain this
Or that just adding that to our list of existing principles would imply big gains
It's hard to say what smith would predict for ai
My suspicion is that the notion of 10 growth was simply not conceivable to him
So he wouldn't have predicted it because he never saw anything like it that to him three percent growth would be a bit like
10 growth it would just shock him
And and bold him over
But smith does also emphasize different human bottlenecks and constraints of the law
So it's quite possible smith would see those bottlenecks as mattering and checking ai growth and its speed
But as a principle given the change we saw pre
pre-industrial revolution and after 1870
Um
Does does that does to you it seemed plausible that you could go from the current regime to a regime where you have 10 growth
for decades on end
That does not seem plausible to me, but I would stress the point
That high rates of growth decades on end the numbers cease to have meaning
Because the numbers make the most sense when the economy is broadly similar
Like oh everyone eats apples and each year there's 10 more apples at a roughly constant price
As the basket changes the numbers become meaningless. It's not to deny. There's a lot of growth
Uh, but you can think about it better by discarding the number
And presumably ai will change the composition of various bundles quite a bit over time
So when you hear these estimates about what the gdp per capita was in the roman empire
Do you just disregard that and think in terms of qualitative changes from that time?
Depends what they're being compared to
So there's pieces in economic history that are looking at say 17th 18th century europe comparing it to the roman empire
Most of gdp's agriculture, which is pretty comparable, right?
Especially in europe, it's not wheat versus corn. It's wheat and wheat
And i've seen estimates that i'll say by 1730
Some parts of western europe are clearly better off than the roman empire at its peak, but like within range
That those are the best estimates. I know and I trust those they're not perfect
But I don't think there's an index number problem so much
Hmm
And so when people say we're 50 percent richer than
An average roman at the peak of the empire you
You but this this kind of thinking doesn't make sense to you
It doesn't make sense to me and a simple way to show that let's say you could buy
From the sears robot catalog of today
Yeah, or from 1905 and you have $50,000 to spend which catalog would you rather buy from?
You have to think about it, right?
Now if you just look at changes in the cpi, it should be obvious you would prefer the catalog from 1905
Everything's so much cheaper that white shirt costs almost nothing
Right at the same time. You don't want that stuff. It's not mostly part of the modern bundle
So even if you ended up preferring the earlier catalog the fact that you have to think about it reflects the ambiguities
When you read the contemporaries of smith other economists were writing at the time
Uh, were his arguments
Just, uh, clearly given the evidence at the time much better than everybody around or was it just that expose to is clearly right
But given the arguments at the time it could have gone any one of different ways
Well, there aren't that many economists at the time of smith, so it depends what you're counting
I mean the two fellow scots you could compare smith to or sir james stewart
Who published a major work? I think in 1767
On some matters stewart was ahead of smith not most clearly smith was far greater
But stewart was no slouch and the other point of comparison is david hume smith's best friend, of course
Uh per page you could argue. Hume was better than smith certainly on monetary theory. Hume was better than smith
Now he's not a goat contender. He just didn't do enough
But I wouldn't say smith was ahead of hume. He had more and more important insights
But hume was pretty impressive now if you're talking about oh like the 18th century german camera lists
uh
Well, they were bad mercantilists, but there's people say writing in sweden in the 1760s
Analyzing exchange rates who had better understandings of exchange rates than smith ever did
So it's not that he just dominated everyone
um
Let me offer some other potential nominees that were not in the book for goat and I want your opinions of them
um, henry george in terms of explaining how land is fundamentally different from labor and capital when we're thinking about the economy
Well, first i'm not sure land is that fundamentally different from labor and capital a lot of the value of land
Comes from improvements and what's an improvement can be quite subtle. It doesn't just have to be you know putting a plow to the land
So I would put george in the top 25
very important thinker
but he's a bit of a
Not a one-note johnny his book on protectionism is still one of the best books on free trade
But he circumscribed in a way say smith and mill were not
uh
Today is he uh, uh, would does the status rise we see rents in big cities status is way up for this reason right of yinbi nimbi
And I think that's correct. He was undervalued
He's worth reading very carefully
A few years ago. We're recording here at mercatus. We had a
Like 12 person two day session with peter teal just on reading henry george. It's all we did
And people came away. Uh, very impressed. I think
I didn't for people who are interested. They might enjoy the episode I did with larce du set. Uh, who oh, I don't know about this
He's a georgist. Oh, yeah, he's uh, uh, he's he's a really smart guy. He wrote
Uh, basically he he wrote a book review of henry george that once got alexander's book review contest
Oh, I know what this is and then he's just turned it into a whole book of his own
Which is actually really good. Um, and I think there's something truly humane in george when you read him
That can be a bit infectious. That's positive. Um
And
It's some insane there was some insane turnout for his funeral, right? Like he was he was very popular at the time
He wrote yeah, and that was deserved. Yeah, uh, I guess you already answered this question
But ronal cos in terms of helping us think about firms and you know property rights and transaction costs
Well, even though I think the 1937 piece is wrong. It did create one of the most important genres
He gets a lot of credit for that. He gets a lot of credit for the coast theorem
The fcc property rights piece is superb. The lighthouse piece is very good. Again, he's in the top 25
But in terms of you like his quantity its own quality
It's just not quite enough. There's no macro
Oh, but of course you rate him very very highly. How about your former advisor thomas shelling?
He is a top tier noble laureate, but I don't think he's a serious contender for greatest economist of all time
He gets the most credit for making game theory intuitive empirical and workable and that's worth a lot
Uh economics of self command he was a pioneer, but in a way that's just going back to the greeks and smith
He's not a serious contender for goat, but a top tier noble laureate for sure
You have you have a fun quote in uh in the book on aro where you say his work was a noble prize winning important
But not important important
Well some parts of it were important important like how to price securities
So I think I underrated aro a bit in the book if you ask like what regrets do I have about the book?
I say very very nice things about aro, but I think I should have pushed him even more
What would aro say about prediction markets?
Well, he was really the pioneer of theoretically understanding how they work
Yeah, so uh
He was around until quite recently. I'm sure he had things to say about prediction markets probably positive. Hmm
um
Uh you so one of the points you make in the book is economics at the time was really a way of carrying forward big ideas about the world
What discipline today is where that happens? Well internet writing. It's not a discipline
But it's a sphere and plenty of it happens more than ever before
But it's segregated from what counts as original theorizing in the academic sense of that word
Is that a good or bad segregation? I'm not sure
But it's really a very sharp radical break from how things had been and it's why I don't think there'll be a new goat contender
Probably not ever or if there is it will be something ai related
Hmm. Yeah, that's that sounds about right to me. Um, but within the context of internet writing, obviously, there's many disciplines there
economics being a prominent one
uh
When you split it up, is there a discipline in terms of I don't know people writing in terms of computer science concepts
Or people writing in terms of economic concepts. Who is today?
The discipline ceased to matter that really good internet writing is multi disciplinary
When I meet someone like a scott arinson who's doing like computer science ai type
Internet writing on his blog. I have way more in common with him
than with a typical research economist say at boston university
and it's not because
I know enough about computer science like I may or may not know a certain amount
But it's because our two enterprises are so similar or scott alexander. He writes about mental illness also
That just feels so similar
And we we really have to rethink what the disciplines are. It may be that method of writing
Is the key differentiator for this particular sphere. Yeah, it's got everything scott arinson was my professor in college
Oh, that's great. Yeah. Yeah
Um, that's where I decided i'm not going to go to grad school because you just see
Because you see like two standard deviations above you easily
Uh, you know, you might as well just choose a different game
But his method of thinking and writing is infectious like that of scott alexander and many of the rest of us. Yeah
um
So I think in the book you say you were raised as much by uh economic thought or the history of economic thought as you are
By your graduate training more much more not it's not even close
Today people would say I was talking to basal hopper and who's a
Young economist and he said he was raised on martial revolution in the same way that you were raised on the history of economic
Talk thought how do you?
Does this seem like a good trade?
Are you happy that people today are raised on scott alexander and martial revolution at the margin?
I would like to see more people raised on marginal revolution
I don't just mean that in a selfish way but the internet writing mode of thinking
I would like to see more economists and research scientists raised on it
But the number may be higher than we think like if I hadn't run emergent ventures
I wouldn't know about basal per se. Maybe you would not have met him
And it's infectious
So it might always be a minority, but it will be the people most likely to have new ideas
And it's a very powerful new mode of thought which I'll call internet way of writing and thinking
And it's not sufficiently recognized as something like a new field or discipline, but that's what it is
I wonder if you're doing enough of that when it comes to ai where I think you have really interesting thoughts about gpd
Five-level stuff, but this has somebody with your sort of polymathic understanding or different fields
If you just like extrapolate out these trends, I feel like you might have a lot of interesting thoughts about when you think
Just in terms of what might be possible with something much further down the line
Well, I have a whole book with ai predictions averages over and I have about 30 bloomberg columns
And probably 30 or 40 marginal revolution posts. I can just say I'll do more
Uh, but the idea at which ideas arrive at me is the binding constraint. I'm not holding them back
Um, speaking of basal, he had an interesting question. Should um, should should society
Uh, or government subsidize savings so that we're in effect having, uh,
It leads to basically a zero social discount rate. So it's people on average. I probably have, you know, uh,
The they're they're prioritizing their own lives. They have discount rates based on their own lives
Uh, if we're long term, I should the government be subsidizing savings
I'll come close to saying yes. First, we tax savings right now. So we should stop taxing savings. Absolutely
I think it's hard to come up with workable ways of subsidizing savings
That don't give rich people a lot of free stuff in a way that's politically unacceptable and also unfair
So i'm not sure we have a good way of subsidizing savings
But in principle, I would be for it if we could do it in the proper targeted manner
Although you had a good argument against this in stubborn attachments, right that over the long term if the if economic growth is high enough
Then the savings of the rich will just be, uh, dissipated to everybody below
Well, i'm not sure to whom it's dissipated. It does get dissipated the great fortunes of the past are mostly gone
But they may not go to people below
And the idea of writing into a tax system subsidies on that scale in essence subsidies to wealth
Not not gdp, but wealth is say six to eight times gdp. I just think the practical problems are quite significant
It's not an idea i'm pushing
But there may at margins be ways you can do it
That say only benefit uh people who are poor ways you can improve like the workings of
Local credit unions through better either regulation deregulation that are a kind of de facto subsidy without having to subsidize
All of the saved wealth
There's got to be a lot of ways you can do that and we should look for that more
Relatedly, uh, I think a couple years ago paul schlemming had an interesting paper that if you look from 1311 to now
Interest rates have been declining. There's been hundreds of years of interest rate declines. What what is the big picture explanation of this trend?
I'm not sure we have one. You may know cow and third law all propositions of real interest rates are wrong
But simply lower risk better information higher buffers of wealth
Would be what you'd call the intuitive
Economistic explanations. There's probably something to them
But how much of that trend do they actually explain as like a percent of the variance? I don't know. Hmm. Let's talk about anarchy
Yeah, you you you VV first about this. I hadn't read the last time we talked and they're really interesting
um, so
Maybe you can restate your arguments as you answer this question
But how much of your arguments about how network industries lead to these cartel like dynamics?
How much of that can help explain what happened to social media web 2.0?
I don't view that as such a cartel. I think there's a cartel at one level which is small but significant
This is maybe more true three four years ago than today with elan owning twitter and other changes
But if someone got kicked off social media platforms
Three four years ago. They would tend to get kicked off all or most of them
It wasn't like a consciously
Collusive decision, but it's a bit like oh, well, I know the guy who runs that platform and he's pretty smart and if he's worried
I should be worried
And that was very bad
I don't think it was otherwise such a collusive equilibria. Maybe some dimensions on hiring
Uh, social
You know people software engineers. There was some collusion not enough bidding
But it was mostly competing for attention
So I think the real risk protection agencies aside of network based collusion is through banking systems
Where you have clearing houses and payments networks
And to be part of it the clearing house in the absence of legal constraint can indeed
Help everyone collude and if you don't go along with the collusion you're kicked out of the payment system
That strikes me as a real issue
Do your arguments against anarchy do they apply it all to a web 3.0 crypto like stuff?
Do I think it will evolve into collusion? I don't see why it would I'm open to hearing the argument that it could though
What would that argument go like?
Well, I guess we did see with crypto that you have
In order to just have workable settlement you needed these centralized institutions
And from there you can get kicked off those and the government is involved with those and you can
You can maybe abstract the government away and say that they will need to collude in some sense in order to facilitate transactions
And the exchanges have ended up quite centralized, right? Yeah
Uh, and that's an example of clearing houses and exchanges being the vulnerable node
But I don't know how much web 3.0 is ever going to rely on that
It seems you can create new crypto assets more or less. It will there's the focality of getting them started
But if there's a real problem with the pre-existing crypto assets, I would think you could overcome that
So I would expect something more like a to and fro
waves of centralization decentralization
And natural checks embedded in the system. That's my intuition at least
Does your argument against anarchy prove too much in the sense that globally different nations have anarchic relations with each other?
And they can't uh, they can enforce coercive monopoly on each other
But they can coordinate to punish bad actors and the way you will do on protection agencies to do, right?
Like we can sanction North Korea together or something. I think that's a very good point and very good question
But I would rephrase my argument
You could say it's my argument against anarchy and it is an argument against anarchy
But it's also an argument that says anarchy is everywhere. So within government
Well the feds the state governments all the different layers of federalism. There's a kind of anarchy
There's not quite a final layer of adjudication the way you might think we pretend there is
I'm not sure how strong it is internationally, of course
Uh, you know how much gets enforced by hegemon how much is spontaneous order
Even the different parts of the federal government. They're in a kind of anarchy with respect to each other
So you need a fair degree of collusion
For things to work and you ought to accept that but maybe in a straussian way where you don't trumpet it too loudly
But the point that anarchy itself will evolve enough collusion to enable it to persist if it persists at all
Is my central point my point is like well anarchy isn't that different
Now given we've put a lot of social political capital into our current institutions
I don't see why you would press the anarchy button
But if I'm north korea and I can press the anarchy button for north korea
I get that it might just evolve into heyty
But I probably would press the anarchy button for north korea if at least someone would come in and control the loose nukes
Yeah, I this is related to one of those classic arguments against the anarchy that under anarchy anything is allowed
So the government is allowed therefore we're in a state of anarchy in some sense
In a funny way that argument's correct. We would revolve something like government
And heyty has done this but in very bad ways where it's our gangs and killings
It doesn't have to be that bad. There's medieval iceland medieval ireland
They had various forms of anarchy
Clearly limited in their destructiveness by low population
ineffective weapons
But they had a kind of stability you can't just dismiss them
And you can debate how governmental were they but the ambiguity of those debates is part of the point that every system has a lot of anarchy
And anarchy's have a fair degree of collusion if they survive
Oh, actually, so I want to go back to much earlier in the conversation where you're saying listen over
It seems like intelligence is is a net good. So just that being your heuristic you should
Call forth the ai
Well, not uncritically you need more argument, but just as a starting point
Yeah, it's like if more intelligence isn't going to help you you have some really big problems anyway
But I don't know if you still have the view that we're we have like an 800 year timeline for human civilization
But that that that sort of timeline implies that
Intelligence actually is going to be the because the thing the reason we have an 800 year timeline
Presumably is like some product of intelligence, right?
My worry is that energy becomes too cheap and people at very low cost can destroy things rather easily
So say if a nuclear if destroying a city with a nuclear weapon cost $50,000
What would the world look like I'm just not sure it might be more stable than we think
But I'm I'm greatly worried and I could readily imagine it falling apart. Yeah, but I guess the bigger point I'm making is that
Uh, in this case the reason the nuke got so cheap was uh because of intelligence
Now that that doesn't mean we should stop intelligence
But it just that if if that's like the end result of intelligence over hundreds of years that doesn't seem like intelligence is
always, uh
I'm not good. Well, we're doing better than the other great apes. I would say even though we face these really big risks
And in the meantime, we did incredible things. So that's a gamble I would take
But I believe we should view it more self-consciously as a sort of gamble
And it's too late to turn back the fundamental choice was one of decentralization
And that may have happened hundreds of millions or billions of years ago
And once you opt for decentralization
Intelligence is going to have advantages
And you're not going to be able to turn the clock back on it. So you're walking this tightrope
And by goodness you'd better do a good job
I mean we should frame our broader history more like that
And it has implications for how you think about x-risk again
I think if the x-risk x-risk people a bit of them, it's like well, I've been living in berkeley a long time and
It's it's really not that different my life's a bit better
And we can't risk all of this
But that's not how you should view broader history
I feel like you're an extras person you have a yeah
I mean even they don't think we're like a hundred percent guaranteed to go out by 800 years or something
No, I don't think we're guaranteed at all. It's up to us. I just think the risk not that everyone dies
I think that's quite low
But that we retreat to some kind of pretty chaotic form of like medieval balkan's existence
With a much lower population that seems to me quite a high risk
With or without ai it's probably the default setting
Given that you think that's a default setting I
Why is that not a big part of your when you're thinking about how new technologies are coming about?
Why why not consciously think in terms of is this getting us to the outcome where we avoid this sort of
A free industrial state that would result from the the $50,000 nukes
Well, if you think the risk is cheap energy more than ai per se admittedly ai could speed the path to cheap energy
It seems very hard to control
The strategy that's worked best so far is to have relatively benevolent nations become hegemon's and establish dominance
So it does influence me. I want the us uk
Some other subset of nations to establish dominance in ai it may not work forever
But in a decentralized world it sure beats the alternative
So a lot of the ai types they're too rationalist and they don't start with the premise that we chose a decentralized world a very very long time ago
even way before humans
And I think you made an interesting point when you were talking about canes in the book where you said
One of his faults was that he assumed that people like him would always be in charge
That's right
And I do see that also in the the alignment discourse like alignment is you know
If it's just handing over the government and just assuming the government does what you'd expect it to do
And I worry about this from my own point of view
So even if you think us is pretty benevolent today
Which is a highly contested and mixed proposition and i'm an american citizen pretty patriotic
But i'm fully aware of the long history of my government in killing and slaving doing other terrible things to people
And then you have to rethink
That over a long period of time it may be the worst
Time period that affects the final outcome even if the average is pretty good
And then if power corrupts
And if government even indirectly controls ai systems
So u.s. Government could become worse because it's a leader in ai right
But again, I've got to still take that over china or russia or
wherever else it might be
I just don't really understand
When people talk about national security, I've never seen the ai doomers say anything that made sense
And I recall those early days remember china issued that edict where they said we're only going to put ai's that are safe
And they can't criticize the ccp. How many super smart people and I mean super smart like zvi
Just jump on that and say c china's not going to compete with us. We can shut ai down
They just seem to have zero understanding of some properties of decentralized worlds
Or leesers tweet was it from yesterday?
Uh, I didn't think it was a joke
But oh, there's a problem that ai can read all the legal code and threaten us with all these penalties
It's like he has no idea how screwed up the legal system is
Hmm. Yeah, it would just need courtroom waits of like 70 or 700 years
It's not it wouldn't become a thing people are afraid of it would be a social problem in some way
What's your sense of how the government reacts when the labs are doing?
Uh, regardless of how they should react how they will react and when the labs are doing like, I don't know
10 billion dollar training runs and
If if under the premise that you know, these are powerful models not human level per se
But just they they can do all kinds of crazy stuff. How do you think the government's gonna?
Are they gonna nationalize the labs or how do you stay in washington? What's your sense?
I think our national security people are amongst the smartest people in our government
Uh, they're mostly well-intentioned in a good way. They're paying careful attention to many things
But what will be the political will to do what they don't control?
And my guess is until there's sort of an spf like incident which might even not be significant
But a headlines incident which spf was even if it doesn't affect the future evolution of crypto, which I guess is my view it won't
Until there's that we won't do much of anything
And then we'll have an spf like incident and we'll overreact
That seems a very common pattern in american history and the fact that it's a i the stakes might be high or whatever
I doubt if it will change the recurrence of that pattern
How would robert nozick think about different ai utopias?
Well, I think he did think about different ai utopias, right?
so uh
I believe he whether he wrote or talked about it, but the notion of humans much smarter
Than they are or the notion of aliens coming down who are like in some way morally intellectually way beyond us
He did write about that and he was worried about how they would treat us. So he was sensitive
To what you would call ai risk viewed a bit more broadly very early on
Hmm. What was his what was his take?
Well nozick is not a thinker of of takes
He was a thinker of speculations and multiple possibilities which I liked about him
He was worried about it this I know
And I talked to him about it
But I couldn't boil it down to a simple take
They made him a vegetarian I should add wait that made him oh because we want to be treating the the entities that are to us as
Aliens from outer space might treat us we are like that to animals
May not be a perfect analogy, but it's still an interesting point and therefore we should be vegetarians
That was his argument at least he felt he should be I wonder if we should honor past generations more or at least like respect their wishes
More for if we think of the the alignment problem
It's a similar to how we react to our previous generations
Do you know if we do we want uh the ai to treat us as we treat people thousands of years ago?
Yeah, it's a good question and uh
I've never met anyone who's consistent with how they view wishes of the dead. Yeah
I don't think there is a consistent philosophically grounded point of view on that one
Hmm. I guess the the sort of thomas pain viewer you don't regard them at all. Is that not self-consistent?
It's consistent, but I've never met anyone who actually lives according to it
Oh, and what's inside the contradicting themselves?
Well, say, you know, their their spouse were to die and the spouse gave them instructions. Sure. They would put weight on those instructions
Somewhere out there. There's probably someone who wouldn't but I've never met such a person
Hmm. And how about the burq view that you take them very seriously?
It why is that not self-consistent the birth view? What do you mean burq burq view? Oh?
Well, it's time inconsistent to take those preferences seriously and burq himself understood that he was a very deep thinker
So while you take them seriously now, but as time passes other ancestors come along
They have somewhat different views you have to keep on changing course what you should do now
Should it be what the ancestors behind us want or your best estimate of what the 30 or 40 years of ancestors to come
Will want once they have become ancestors
So it's time inconsistent. There's not again. There's not going to be a strictly philosophical resolution. There will be practical attempts
to find something sustainable
And that which survives will be that which we do and then we'll somewhat rationalize it exposed. Yeah. Yeah, there's an interesting book about
The ancient ancient Greeks. What was it called? I forgot the name, but it's talks about the hearts that they have for the
For their families where the the dead become gods
But then over time if you keep this heart going for hundreds of years
There's like thousands of ancestors that you didn't even remember their names, right? Who are you praying to?
And then it's like the arrow and possibility theorem for all the gods
What do they all mean too?
And you can't even ask them. Yeah
Okay, we were talking before we started recording about argentina and the reforms they're trying there
And they're trying to dollarize because the dollar is more stable than their currency
But this raises the question of why is the dollar so stable? So we're also democracy, right?
But like the dollar seems pretty well managed. What is the larger explanation of why?
Uh, the monetary policy seems well managed in the u.s. Well u.s. Voters hate inflation mostly for good reasons
And we have enough wealth that we can pay our bills
Without having to inflate very much and two percent has been stable now for quite a while
Now it's an interesting question, which I cannot answer and I have looked into this and I have asked smart people from argentina
Why does argentina in particular have recurring waves of hyperinflation?
Is there something about the structure of their interest groups that
Inevitably recurringly leads them to demand too much. I suppose
But there's plenty of poor badly run countries that don't have hyperinflation
African countries historically have not had high rates of hyperinflation haven't had high rates of inflation
Why is that?
Well, maybe they don't capture enough through senior age for some reason currency holdings aren't large enough
There's some kind of financial repression. I don't know
But it's very hard to explain why some of these countries, but not others go crazy with the printing press
And this is maybe a broader question about different institutions in the government where
I don't understand enough to
evaluate their like object level decisions
But if you look at the supreme court or the federal reserve or something just from a distance
It seems like they're really well run competent organizations with a highly technocratic, you know
Non-partisan people running them. They're not non-partisan, but they're still well run. Yeah, and
What's the theory of why these institutions in particular are so much better run?
Is it just that they are
They're one step back from direct elections is that they have traditions of knowledge within them. How do we think about this?
I think both of those
I don't think the elections point is sufficient because there's plenty of unelected bodies. They're totally corrupt. Yeah around the world
most of them are perhaps
Some sense of american civic virtue that gets communicated
And then the incentives are such say you're on the fed for a while
What you can do afterward can be rewarding
But you want a reputation for having done a good job
So your sense of morality and your private self-interest coincide
And that's pretty strong and we're still in that loop. I don't really see signs of that loop breaking
It's also striking to me how many times I'll read an interesting article or paper and
The person who wrote it's like the former head of the federal reserve in new york or something
It just seems like a this is strong indication of these institutions that the standards are very high
And if you speak with any of those people like who've been on fed boards ask them questions. They're super smart super involved curious
Uh, really for the most part do you want the best thing for their country?
Oh going back to these economists
You at the end you talk about how you're kind of uh disappointed in this sort of turn that economics has taken
Maybe I just I'm not surprised right? It's division of labor adam smith
Who said it would make people a bit feeble minded and incurious was completely correct
Wait adam smith said what would make people division of labor? I see right? Yeah, not stupid
You know current economic researchers probably have never been smarter, but they're way less broad and less curious
um
Patrick Ellison put it an interesting way where he said in the past maybe thinkers were more interested in
Delving into the biggest questions
But if they they couldn't do it rigorously in a tractable way
They would just they would make the trade-off in favor of the big question and today we make the opposite trade-off
How does that seem like a fair comparison? I think that's correct and I would add that saying the time of smith
There was nothing you could do rigorously
So there was no other option. Well, oh i'm gonna specialize and
You know memorizing all the grain prices and run some great econometrics on that and that'll be rigorous
It's really william stanley jevons
Who to the anglo world introduced this notion there's something else you can do that's rigorous
It was not yet rigorous, but he opened the door and showed people the alternative
Of the of the jevons paradox
Well, I would say his work in statistics originally on the value of money, right?
But his statistical work on call also had some rigors. So you're not wrong to cite them
And jevons just showed
That rigorous statistical work and economics could be the same thing
And that was his greater innovation than just marginalism
So he's an underrated figure
Maybe he should be in the book in a way
But it had some unfortunate secondary consequences too many people crowd into specialization
Crowd is a funny word to use because they reach sitting in their separate nodes, but it's a kind of crowding
Is there some sort of hyacin a solution here where?
Yeah, in markets the effect of having the sort of decentralized processes the the the sum is greater than the parts
Whereas in academic disciplines the sum is just a bunch of different statistical aggregates
Uh, there's no grand theory that comes together as a result of
All this micro work. Is there some hyacin solution here? Well, yes, you and I are the hyacin solution
That a specialist proliferate we can be
Quote-unquote parasitic on them and take what they do and turn it into interesting larger bundles that they haven't dreamt of
And make some kind of living doing that and we're much smaller in number
But i'm not sure how numerous we should be and there's a bunch of us, right?
You're just ever category titler
I'm running a podcast here
And what do you see as a future of the sort of uh, the kind of sort of thinking you do are
Are you do you see yourself as the last of the literary economist or is there a future of this kind of
Is it just going to be the slates our codex's are they going to take care of it or
This sort of lineage of thinking well the next me won't be like me
Yeah, in that sense i'm the last but i don't think it will disappear. It will take new forms
It may have a lot more to do with ai
And i don't think it's going to go away. There's just a demand for it
There's a real demand for our products. We have a lot of readers listeners people interested whatever and there'll be ways to monetize that
The challenge might be
Competing against ai and it doesn't have to be that ai does it better than you or i do without it might
But simply the people prefer to read what the ai's generate for 10 or 20 years
And it's harder to get an audience because playing with the ai's is a lot of fun. So that will be a real challenge
I think some of us will be up to it. You'll be faced with it more than i will be
Uh, but it's going to change a lot. Yeah, okay
Uh, one of the final things i want to do is i want to go into political philosophy a little bit
And uh, ask you
Okay, so i want to ask you about sort of certain potential weaknesses of the democratic capitalist model that we live in and in terms of
Both in terms of whether you think they're object level law wrong. Uh, sorry object level right and second
how
Regardless of how right they are how how um persuasive and how powerful
A force they will be against uh, our you know, our system of uh, uh government and functioning. Okay
Okay, so there's a libertarian critique that basically democracy is sort of a random walk with a drift toward socialism
And there's also a rashard effect where government programs don't go away
And so it just ends up towards socialism at the end
It ends up with having government that is too large. Yeah, but i
Don't see the evidence that it's wrote to serfdom
France sweden have had pretty big governments way too large in my opinion
But they haven't threatened to turn autocratic or totalitarian certainly not
And you've seen reforms in many of those countries sweden moved away from
Government approaching 70 percent of gdp and now it's quite manageable
Government there should be smaller yet
I don't think the trend is that negative. It's more of a problem with regulation and the administrative state
But we've shown an ability to create new sectors like big parts of tech
They're not unregulated laws apply to them, but they're way less regulated and it's a kind of race
Uh, that race doesn't look too bad to me at the moment like we could lose it
But uh, so far so good. So it the critique should be taken seriously, but it's yet to be validated. Hmm
Uh, how about the egalitarian critique from the left that you can't have
The inequality the market creates with the political and moral equality that the you know, humans deserve in demand
They just say that
US has high degree of income inequality. Yeah
Uh, so does brazil a much less well functioning society
Brazil continues on average. It will probably grow one or two percent. That's not a great record
But brazil has to go up in a puff of smoke. I don't see it
And how about the niche and critique and in the um, the end of history fukiyama says this is more powerful
This is the one he's more worried about than the more more so than the leftist critique
Over time
Basically what you end up with is the last man and you can't defend the civilization. You know the story
It's a lot of words. I mean, is he short the market? I've asked fukiyama this
He's not this is a long time ago, but he wasn't short the market then
Again, it's it's a real issue
It seems to me the problems of today for the most part
Are more manageable than the problems of any previous era
We still you know might all go poof
Return to medieval Balkan style existence in a millennia or whatever
But it's a fight and we're totally in the fight and we have a lot of resources and talent. So like let's do it
Okay, I don't see why that particular worry
It's it's a lot of words
And I like to get very concrete like even if you're not short the market
If that were the main relevant worry, where would that show up in asset prices?
It's a cot worse. It's a very concrete question
I think it's very useful to ask and when people don't have a clear answer. I get worried. Where does your prediction that?
Hundreds of years down the line will have the $50,000 nukes. Where does that show up in the asset prices?
I think at some point vix, you know an index of volatility will go up
Uh, probably not soon nuclear proliferation has not gone crazy, which is wonderful
But I think at some point it's hard to imagine it not getting out of control
Um, last I read vix is surprisingly low and stable. That's right. I think 2024 is on
On the path to be a pretty good year
Yeah, or do you think the market is just wrong in terms of thinking about both geopolitical risk from, you know, israel or whatever
I don't think the market's wrong at all. I think
That war will converge. I'm not saying the humanitarian outcome is a good one
But in terms of the global economy, I think markets are thinking rationally about it
Though the rational forecast of course is often wrong
What's your sense on the scaling stuff when you look at the arguments? Uh, in the terms of what's coming? How do you react to that?
Well, your piece on that was great
I don't feel I have the expertise to judge that as a technical matter
It does seem to me intuitively it would be weird on the technical side if scaling just stopped working
But on the knowledge side, I think people underestimate possible barriers and what I have in mind is
Quite a bit of reality the universe might in some very fundamental way simply not be legible
And that there's no easy and fruitful way to just quote unquote apply more intelligence to the problem
Like oh, you want to integrate general relativity and quantum mechanics
It may just be we've hit the frontier and there's not a final layer of oh here's how it fits together
So there's no way to train in ai or other thing
To make it smarter to solve that and maybe a lot of the world is like that
And that to me people are not taking seriously enough. So I'm not sure what the net returns will be
to
bigger and better and smarter ai
That seems possible for you know, p versus np type of reasons. It's just like harder to make uh for further discoveries
but
I feel like we have pretty good estimates in terms of like the declining
A researcher productivity because of low hanging fruit being gone in this sort of sense
of we're reaching the frontier and
Whatever percent it is a year if you can just keep the ai population growing faster than that
If you just want to be crude about it that seems enough to if not get to the ultimate physical synthesis
At least much broader than where human civilization would get in the same span of time. That seems very plausible
I think we'll get further. I expect big productivity gains
As a side note, I'm less convinced by the declining researcher productivity argument than I used to be
So the best way to measure productivity for an economist is wages and wages of researchers haven't gone down
Period in fact, they've gone up. No, they may not be producing new ideas
You might be paying them to be functionaries or to manage pr or does this manage other researchers?
But I think that's a worry that we have a lot more researchers
with
Generally rising researcher wages and that hasn't boosted productivity growth. China, india, south korea brought into the world economy
scientific talent
It's better than if we hadn't done it, but it hasn't in absolute terms boosted productivity growth
And maybe that's a worrisome sign
Uh on on the metric of researcher wages
It seems like it could just be a fact that even the even the
Less marginally useful improvements are worth the extra cost in terms of if you think of a company
Like google is probably paying as engineers a lot more than it was paying in the early days
Even though they're doing less now because you know
Changing a pixel in the the new google page is going to affect billions of users
The similar thing could be happening in the economy, right? That might hold for google researchers, but take people in pharma biomedicine
There's a lot of private sector
Financed research or indirectly financed by buying up smaller companies
And it only makes sense if you get something out of it that really works
Like a good vaccine or a good medication ozempic super profitable
So wages for biomedical researchers in general haven't gone down
Now finally it's paying off
But i'm not sure ai will be as revolutionary as the other ai optimists believe
I do think it will raise productivity growth in ways which are visible
To what extent?
In the conventional agro story you think in terms of population size, right?
And then so you just increase the population size you get much more research at the other end
To what extent doesn't make sense to think about well, if you have these billions of ai copies
We can think of that in terms of as a proxy of how much progress they could
Produce is that a not a sensible way to think about that at some point having billions of copies probably won't matter
It will matter much more. How good is the best thing we have and how well integrated is it
Into our other systems which have bottlenecks of their own
And the principles governing the growth of that are much harder to discern
It's probably a much slower growth than just juicing up
Oh, we've got a lot of these things and they're trained on more and more gpu's
But precisely because the top seems to matter so much is why we might expect bigger gains, right?
So if you think about jews in the 20th century
You know two percent of the population are less than that and 20 percent of the noble prizes
It does seem like you can have a much bigger impact than
If you're on the very tail if you just have
Just a few hundred john von neumann copies
Maybe that's a good analogy that the impact of ai will be like in the 20th century the impact of jews, right?
Which would be excellent, right? Yeah, but it's not
Extraordinary, it's not a science fiction novel. It is. I mean you read the early 20th century stuff as you have
You know, it's like a slow takeoff right there of like, you know, go from v2 rockets to the moon and a couple of decades
It's it's kind of a crazy pace of change. Yeah, that's what I think it will be like again
Great stagnation is over. We'll go back to those earlier rates of change transform a lot of the world
Mostly a big positive a lot of chaos
Disrupted institutions along the way. That's my prediction
But no one writes a science fiction novel about the 20th century. It feels a bit ordinary still
Hmm. Yeah, even though it wasn't I forget the name of the philosopher you asked this to but the the feminist philosopher you asked the question
Amiya Srinivasan
You asked the question what would have to be different for you to be a social conservative, right?
What would have to be different for you to not be a tumor per se?
But just one of these people who like
This is the main thing to be thinking about during this period of history or something like that
Well, I think it is one of the main things we should be thinking about
But I would say if I thought international cooperation
Were very possible
I would at least
Possibly have very different views than I do now
Or if I thought no other country could make progress on AI those seem unlikely to me, but they're not logically impossible
so
The fundamental premise where I differ from a lot of the doomers
Is my understanding of a decentralized world and its principles being primary
Their understanding is some kind of comparison like here's the little people
And here's the big monster and the big monster gets bigger
And even if the big monster does a lot of good things, it's just getting bigger and here are the little people
That's a possible framework
But if you start with decentralization and competition and well, how are we going to manage this?
In some ways my perspective might be more pessimistic
But you you don't just think you can wake up in the morning and like legislate safety
Hmm
You look at the history of relative safety having come from hegemon's and you hope your hegemon stays good enough
Which is a deeply fraught proposition. I recognize that. Hmm. What's the next book?
I'm already writing it. Uh part of it is on jevons, but the title is the marginal revolution
But not about the blog about the actual marginal. Yeah, but it's maybe a monograph like 40 000 words
But I don't think book length should matter anymore
I want to be more radical on that
I think 40 000 words is perfect because it would actually fit in context. So when you do the gpd4
Now context may be bigger by then. Yeah, but I want to have it in
GPT in some way or whatever is replaced it. Hmm
Okay, uh, those are all the questions I had tell her this is a lot of fun
And uh, keep up the great work and uh, delighted you're at it. Thank you. Thank you. Uh, yeah
Thanks for coming on the podcast. It's the third time now. So a lot of fun. Okay. Bye everyone
Hey everybody, I hope you enjoyed that episode
As always the most helpful thing you can do is to share the podcast
Send it to people you think might enjoy it put it in twitter your group chats, etc. Just splits the world
Appreciate your listening. I'll see you next time. Cheers
You